all right I hope you had a beautiful
break and had a chance to move around
and take care of yourself um I am so
excited for this conversation because it
builds so beautifully on the last
conversations that we've been having and
gives you kind of a peak behind the
fourth wall so these are many of the
developers and designers of the
uh different prototypes that we have in
the cryptic metaverse lab so I will
introduce them all um at the end down
there well after our wonderful parar who
is sign interpreter ASL interpreter um
we have Serena trapi a 3D artist and
designer for Te we have Don Hansen
artist and founder of new art City we
have Kate Stevenson experienc and game
designer of dot dot and um the developer
for uh te and then we have here ardan
shager multidisiplinary artist with
death Club so this conversation is all
about the development and we're going to
start actually with each of you
introducing yourself and your role in
the project and a little bit of your
background as is related to this project
so maybe we can start in order sna you
want to kick it off thank you uh hello
everyone um I'm been working with this
project as a 3D uh designer and concept
artist so we've been developing the um
the translations of Texa dospace website
concept into the try word h but my
background is a bit more articulated
because I started like I have a degree
in industrial design and then I mov into
set design for Opera Productions and
then little by little I got more
interested into accessibility and
sustainability both in a in like um
environmental and social uh directions
and uh I started like trying to move
into the virtual set word and I started
some experience into the metaverse and
so this led me to this Amazing
Project hey my name is Don Hansen I'm
the founder of New York City and a
designer and developer been doing web
development for such a long time and
designing websites and became an
internet artist and a new media artist
and then combined all that stuff to make
a virtual art space called new art city
and for this um I collaborated with Nat
Decker to produce the um the the piece
called touch which is debuted as the
first VR piece in newart city so it's
all webxr based and we took extra
special care to make sure that we're
developing a solution that's with
accessibility first like all all things
that we do at new art city so very
excited to share all This Together cool
uh my name is Kate and I think like with
everyone on this panel we're all quite
multidisiplinary background in uh dance
film Virtual Worlds um predominantly in
kind of the realm of uh experience and
game design um and on these projects we
worked on the development of the tix
City uh vierse um experience um it's not
just me as well um I'm founder of a
studio called dot dot so on this
particular project um a number of our
team um worked in different capacities
across development technical art um and
um art
integration hi my name is uh my name is
ardan and I'm a multi-disciplinary
artist programmer and also a teacher and
I um used to teach here at gry area
actually I live in New York right now
but it's really nice to be back here and
I I helped um I helped build the viers
death club with Melissa and it was um it
was a really really fun project it was
really challenging but it was um
culturally I think it's just such an
amazing piece so yeah it was it was like
it was a lot of
fun uh to frame there's a there's a
handful of people of course that are not
on stage uh who were a big part of the
development um one of which is right
here in the crowd J who did the 3D
design for uh the de club we also had
all of the engineers and the developers
who were on the side of Vive Arts who
were supporting all of the developers
that were working on both um te and also
the de club uh so just want to
acknowledge their uh presence and
support as well as um all the other
artists who were involved so as we're
getting into this conversation the first
thing I wanted to do was Kick It Off by
giving you the opportunity to talk a
little bit about designing for Access
and what considerations you were working
with during the development process so
maybe don do you want to start with that
question sure yeah so designing for
Access with this project in particular
in nework city we already have a desktop
website and we already have a mobile
website so this is the addition of a VR
mode for new art city and each one of
these platforms com comes with its
unique sort of input styles and device
apis and all of these kinds of things
that take a lot of consideration to work
properly with the hardware so when it
comes to VR headsets there's so many
different headsets and all sorts of
different controllers different numbers
of buttons different styles and with all
of the things that we do at newart City
we want to make sure to produce art
experiences that are compatible and can
reach the greatest number of people so
when we start to approach VR we think
about okay with all these different
styles of Hardware how do we do that so
the first idea and the first
implementation for this prototype is
let's just not even use the the
controllers at all so let's make
everything gaze based so all of the all
of the VR headsets have at least three
degrees of freedom so left right up and
down like even the the cardboard that
you put your phone in to look around
that doesn't have controllers but we
want to be able to deploy for all of
these devices so that's why we chose
gaze based navigation where when you're
looking around in the headset you can
move your head and for this first
prototype we've positioned way points so
the artist has decided certain areas of
the exhibit which are kind of these
places that they decided like this is a
nice vantage point to to view the piece
so when you look at one of these way
points it first makes a kind of gentle
ding sound just like when you're like
using your mouse on a 2d website and you
put your cursor over a hyperlink it
changes the color that's an indication
that an intera an interaction is
possible so we want the same thing to to
we want the same sort of feedback as a
user in the headset to know like oh an
interaction is occurring even if you
have low vision or even no vision if you
move your head and you intersect one of
these way points you can hear it that
something is taking place and then
there's a very light sort of white noise
swell as you continue to look at that
point and a visually high contrast
marker increases in size so once that
marker reaches its full size you
teleport to the wayp point that the
artist has chosen so we're really trying
to address the wide variety of Hardware
but also the different levels of ability
to be able to use this regardless and
have it available to all types of
users does anyone else want to pick up
on that question of thinking about the
access in the design
process um yeah I can talk about that a
little bit so the challenges that we had
were a bit different so don was
developing for the web um we were
developing directly on the viers
platform itself and so um in in our in
our experience building the de Club one
of the initial ideas we had was that we
wanted people to be able to use um use
their hands to use sign language in in
the metaverse and um that that was
actually not a possibility and so um I
think we we kind of had to like go back
and really rethink what we were trying
to achieve but um so so in our in our de
club we um we really highlight a lot of
different different art and the
different cultural artifacts things like
that and then we put avatars that are
kind of like doing doing sign language
but they're frozen in place and so I
guess in our in our version it was
almost like we're it's a speculative
design piece as Melissa had said so
we're we're kind of using it almost to
like prototype what what it would feel
like um when the technology does like
catch up to what we hope to achieve so I
guess like um in a way we because the
technology wasn't there we we wanted to
see what it would feel like um when the
technology does get closer and so we got
as close as we
could and I wonder you know Kate and
Seda for T um there were different types
of access that were trying to be met in
the design for meeting indira's Vision
they have a really beautiful intention
for this piece to be about contemplation
um and about Memorial and weaving and so
I'm I'm curious how as we start to build
a bridge from some of the design
considerations to the way that those
interacted with collaborating with
artists um maybe you two could uh share
a little bit about Ted and uh how that
process
unfolded yeah I think it's really
interesting because this project already
showed up in the world in this other
beautiful way um tiet dospace and so
really in working with IND Indira and
Serena it was about working out like
what is tix in the vi verse it's not the
same thing as it is in another space and
I think in the past we've had labels to
describe this kind of thinking that kind
of awful like trans media but it was
really a project that asked us to think
expansively about how do we create
something that's meaningful that
highlights what the vierse is great at
um but then also holds the authenticity
of tetti um as an experience I don't
know if you have anything else you want
to add sadena yeah I love to add that
like one of the most interesting part of
the process was that the project already
exists in the website with a very uh
physical comcept that is the one of
waving and it's been amazing to try and
translate this also in a dimensionality
so like as in the two level uh Treads
vertical and horizontal in the 2D space
we got actually vertical and horizontal
which means a completely different thing
in a in a in a like digital physical
world so it's been also um a very nice
conversation at the very start with Inda
because uh she like they had a perfect
idea of how people needed to start the
experience and that's why we've been
hiding elements little by little like
for example we' got the descending
stairs which is an important element
because let people tap step by step into
this experience just like she wanted
they wanted to um access to the trauma
and to deal with it in in a phase that
goes little by little into what can be
shared instead I think you're starting
to point to something really important
the way that these prototypes were built
was very much a collaboration each of
these developers and designers and
artists who are up here and who are also
not represented on the stage were
brought together with these different
artists who had varying levels of
technical capability to actually bring
some of this work to life and so it was
a process of actually getting to pair
the right team together to support
bringing their ideas to the world um and
that takes translating their ideas in
different ways and helping to see what
is that intersection between what the
technology and the platforms can or
cannot do um and adjusting to kind of
Meet the dream and vision and so maybe
um Don you can kind of take next on that
process with Nat and I know you already
had a long uh kind of history of working
together uh in community and
collaboration yeah Nat has been working
with us on our accessibility panel um
since nearly start of newart City so it
was already a very comfortable working
relationship and for this piece it was
pretty it was pretty emergent um we kind
of talked about what the piece could be
like what's possible how can we approach
this what tools are already in new art
city and then kind of started dreaming
about what can go beyond so it was very
much like it kind of emerged like a sort
of a pingpong I think where Nat would
come up with a prototype and then send
it to me and say like okay can we can we
take this further what what can we do
next and then I would kind of fix it up
to make it work better in the VR headset
and then would take it from there and
say like Okay so let's do audio let's do
subtitles let's talk about the movement
Styles and it was an incredibly valuable
collaboration because every every artist
we work with at new art city is a huge
learning opportunity and so we're trying
to understand both what an individual
artist needs and how these needs can be
brought into the the toolkit to address
the needs of many many artists like
everybody using the toolkit so and then
as things got closer to the launch date
of course the the cycle becomes faster
we're ping ponging every day and and
then every hour it's like it got very um
very quick at the end so
um yeah it was it was really exciting to
finally see it here in person with the
headsets and like it's amazing to see
all of the the people trying it as well
cuz everybody's feedback is also
incredible important to shaping how we
approach these experiences um especially
like creating VR experiences that are
meant for exhibition not just at home
like New York City of course yeah it's
meant for like all your devices but
especially we want to solve exhibition
problems and when you are exhibiting VR
in a space like this in a gallery
there's different considerations than
just playing with it at home so we
really kind of that's sort of why we
approached it in a in a
in the terms of like simplifying it so
like and thinking about the average
length of time that somebody spends in a
VR exhibition in person so thinking
about like okay if they're going to
spend a few minutes in here which is
like we're lucky if people spend like
five plus minutes so try to make it as
simple as possible and make these places
that Nat chose to as Vantage points to
look at the exhibition
from thank you Don um as you were
sharing I was thinking about also your
experience ardan working with um not
only a de artist but an entire cultural
kind of space that this project was
hoping to reinvigorate and I'm curious
how that like contexts the relationship
of working with the artist and also the
density of the historic kind of culture
that and um context that the project was
embedded within affected uh and impacted
the design of your work I remember you
telling me about and Melissa showing
like little napkins and you know just
like the and the way that that actually
came to be in terms of your job as a
developer um maybe you can tell a little
bit of that
story yeah definitely um so with with
the de Club I um I I I want to I think
the best way to describe it is the de
Club was definitely made with uh with
love and care and we um with with each
uh there there are like 50 artists in
the de club or sorry 30 30 artists 50
artworks in the de club and um each of
those each of each of those artists kind
of like you know reflects on a different
um piece of of culture and and so we we
were really um it was it was a
collaboration for sure not just between
me Melissa and J but also between like
the the community that was involved in
creating the piece and so um when we
were when we were doing that we're all
really uh we were very very careful
about making sure that each artist is
like you know honored properly and
they're um they're all attributed they
they have everything that they wanted to
say and their um in their artist placard
is all there and and on top of that just
thinking about like Melissa taught me so
much about the the history of of De
culture and so many of the different
cultural artifacts and some of the um
some of the like you know different
different events that happen the good
and bad and um we actually uh maybe I
don't know if Melissa wants me to talk
about this but there was even at some
point there was like a there was a
basement idea we didn't we didn't
include it but the basement was going to
include some of the some of the like um
less positive like things that might
have happened in De culture and so we
didn't include It ultimately but we were
just putting so much thought about what
what to include and um yeah like
ultimately we were just because it was a
collaboration we just we just uh put
like a lot of like love and care into
arranging each artwork so that it like
you know does its best to to shine so
yeah hopefully you can see that in the
final
result I know that this piece also
specifically had you know in terms of
speculation uh a lot of edges that I was
really pushing against uh and I'm
curious of all the ideas of the ways
that you wanted to present that uh and
some of the potential of ASL for example
inside of the space which ones of those
were you able to realize and which ones
were you
not yeah so I I think with this with
this piece it um again we are kind of
like we kind of uh a little bit limited
by what XR uh provides us and also the
the reach in the platform so there is
actually um on on VR chat there is
actually a group of people who does do
um they do ASL lessons um
semi-regularly and so there there are
sort of like communities that are
interested in
in this sort of like cultural
exchange and I think um being able to
like capture some of that like the
energy is there but sometimes the
technology is not there so just
recognizing that the energy and the
desire is there and then like um
eventually you know like reaching out
with these these folks and um letting
them letting them try the de verse or
the the vierse death club would be
really really cool
so yeah I think I think the I think the
energy is there probably like in a lot
of different communities and the
technology is still catching up so one
of the one of the really hard Parts is
that the developer experience for
Cutting Edge Technologies is often
really um really strenuous and so I I
think also like not just like me as a
developer but like in general just
opening up these opening up these tools
to allow people to speak their truth and
making making the tools and the
developer experience a lot easier so
then like not only like you know me like
as an expert like you don't have to like
just me but then like the community
itself can start building these tools
and then um you know creating more like
allowing themselves to express them like
be be expressive with these different
Technologies so I I think that part of
it is the the like it's a sort of a
paradox of cuttingedge Technology like
you need an expert but um eventually I
think the tooling will like it will get
a lot easier and then we'll be a we'll
really be able to see these different
like cultural spaces pop up S I have I
have a question for you because I know
you didn't actually get to experience
the work until you got here so as the 3D
designer for uh and with t What
surprised you uh from your
collaborations with Indira the
difference between what you thought it
was going to be and what it
was yeah it's been like a very
interesting process of uh developing
something in a way that uh I was not
going to be able to see exactly output
and the outcome of everything that we
were adding but um in this I think that
it's been just amazing to work as a team
between uh the artist me dot dot and the
viers um uh Team because we were
exchanging so many information that we
all have access to the same level of
knowledge of what the PO where the
project was going to be and we all help
each other to translate information and
to for example like like do do got me
lots of videos of what you actually look
in the inv viors uh so I feel like it's
very important also to uh get knowledge
about what are the differences into
these things because probably in the
future people will be able to access it
more in the PC version than in actually
the adset versions so we we actually add
a particular care in cating boat output
as if uh one day we know that people
will have this Bo both of these
experiences but as a personal point of
view into like putting the ad on for the
first time um I think that uh the
biggest differences was that you were
really able to interact with it in a in
a uh face tof face effect with all the
little tools that you had while in the P
version you were just like like a
visitor of this this this space which he
had uh some good aspect because for me
that experience connected more with the
memorial symbolism of it while this is
more about how you actually experience a
space that is made for this propose and
how you can contribute with your
part that's
beautiful I think the the next thing we
were going to talk about is about kind
of some of a little bit more getting
into the nitty-gritty of some of the
challenges that came up um and what
Solutions you implemented around those
uh I know that there were a number of
challenges and when we were having our
Preparatory conversation I was impressed
at the the positive tone that everyone
had it's like you know I think uh we get
more creative with boundaries and so I
think it'll be really interesting to
hear from each of you um and maybe since
you were just talking said if you want
to start and we can just kind of go down
the line because I know everyone has
something to say about this yeah it's
been very uh challenging to to like have
access to this newborn platform and
trying to implement as as maximum as
possible the vision that we that H indir
and the team at at the very first um
moment of creation of creation of the
concept uh and I think that uh this
spirit that you were talking about this
optimism was the thing that brought us
to uh nice and cool solution to limits
that the platform as for example like it
was very complex to have a complex
geometry but it was very important for
indir to have a space with mist with
clouds and with other things and so we
find a way to get that without uh
actually like uh avoiding the problem of
polygons in the space so we use just
texture and we create uh the element
anyway and for example we felt the need
that um uh experience the uh uh the
texter uh space and um it was important
to have the feeling that all the people
were in there and so that that team came
with this great idea to just have fake
avatars moving in the space and this
helps a lot people to F in a community
in a community space as well so I think
that of course um it is not easy to uh
like push the maximum of these
Technologies but there are always ways
if you keep this attitude into like
problem solving and solutions there will
always be a way to achieve what your
intentions
are Don i' love to hear from you yeah so
with this piece we are developing for
the web so new city is a website we've
never made an app it's just a website
and so when we go to the headset we use
the
browser and that's a that's a different
environment than developing a native app
for the headset and there's a whole
extra set of challenges when you're
developing for the web in a platform and
in a piece of Hardware like that where
pretty much most of the resources go
into making the native the native apps
work fast and good and have access to
all of the hardware the Hardware's um
capabilities whereas the web that's like
another that's a different environment
that's like a secondary place where like
yeah there's websites and so we're using
an API called webxr
and in theory that's supposed to cover
all all sorts of
headsets but when we start to get into
the details of like okay let's do the
implementation let's follow the steps
and find the tutorials all of a sudden
it's like whoa there's no tutorials what
do we how are we going to do this um
especially for for some of the there's
like I mentioned there's so many
different headsets and like so we have
this production piece of gear and
starting to look for like okay what how
do we work with this specific headset
and when there there's no information
that that's an incredible challenge so
there were lots of lots of troubl
shooting lots of like looking in weird
menus following weird threads like going
down every Rabbit Hole just to find out
how how are we going to like get
something to render on here and debug it
and that kind of thing
so as a as a web developer like I've
kind of and an internet artist I've kind
of like create created my artistic
career around launching ites because the
lifespan of a website is much longer
than that of a native app a website is
inherently preservable
accessible and it's free and it's
decentralized there's so many advantages
to making websites but when
we're limited with what we can do and
the and the resources
to to create experiences on the web it
becomes very very hard to believe that
the web will be a winning solution for
these Advanced headsets I there was like
a moment of hopelessness where I'm like
oh webxr like is supposed to work in
theory but this is like
impossible so major challenges to to
deploy a webxr app that really that
really works and like I'm incredibly
proud that we somehow managed to make a
prototype for this and yeah
um we're going to keep working on it and
of course these things are going to
going to evolve and we're like so so
early but um yeah we're going to just
try to keep supporting this and make it
better over
time uh so for us we came on to this
project partway through um and dar and
Serena had done some work already on the
concept and I really saw our role as
kind of like a translator kind of try to
work out like how we honor the intention
of the work um with the kind of creative
constraints of the vierse platform
platform um and a lot of the constraints
that came with the platform were there
for really good reasons around security
and um not letting a third party
developer just take down their system
with a piece of code they shouldn't have
uploaded um so a lot of those things are
there um to kind of keep the tool easy
to use and mean that you can deploy this
multiplayer uh experience up to the um
up to the cloud and access it on a
headset within you know a couple of
minutes which is pretty awesome um and
so I guess the key things that we found
I guess is creative Sol Solutions or
things that that worked well I think for
the design um in this in the world if
you haven't been there already there's
up to 50 different sounds I don't know
if Amanda is in the room um but um
depending on where you are in the room
in the in the world um you get a
different kind of mix of those sounds um
so it's all spatialized in 3D you walk
around and it kind of allows you to have
this kind of ambient experience of the
soundscape um that's kind of always
different um and takes you kind of to
that place of reflection um of Memorial
um and that's something that we could do
in a 3D space um really well that
couldn't happen in tix 2D for example
and I think the other thing that um we
played with when we first got hold of
the tool is like what are the things
that we can do to let um uh visitors
interact uh with the world and with each
other and so there were two kind of key
features in the vierse that we I guess
essentially reappropriated one was this
idea of a Post-It note um which in the
kind of vierse for business there's a
yellow poster not as you would expect to
find uh but in um tix in the vi verse
shows up as this little um this little
circle that you can kind of leave notes
around the space um for other people to
stumble upon that um is your way of
putting in putting into the world um an
experience of loss or um something that
you want to share around your kind of
contemplation of the prompt um and then
the other way was um the pen tool I
don't know if anyone found that but um
uh there is a pen
in in the vierse for you to be able to
um write messages um and in the Tet
space we gave it a specific uh color
palette and we kind of um allow people
to uh draw respond create um sculptural
uh uh moments um that other people can
come through and
discover cool yeah I really like what
was said about um acting as almost like
a translator for like the the vision of
the piece and I also really like what
Serena said about kind of like making
the peace feel more um I'm paraphrasing
but live lived in and that was um that
was definitely a big challenge that we
we were facing so initially when we
first created the the um building for
the de Club there wasn't really any art
and there are definitely no like patrons
in the building and so it was uh it was
a bit like hard to see how how it would
feel in the in the ends um and how and
so we we spent a lot of time trying to
figure out how to make it feel like a
space that is lived in and so we put
different different avatars around and
in the end and they um they're like you
know using using sign language we we
have a wide diversity of avatars as well
so we have like one Avatar who's I think
both deaf and blind and then we have
another Avatar who's in like a a
wheelchair and so we wanted to just make
it feel like as real of a place as
possible and then um that also kind of
entailed just leaving things around like
uh this this almost goes to like a sort
of a level design mentality like we are
building a space and we putting we're
putting napkins around and there are
different like cards and different
cultural artifacts and it's uh I I doubt
that anyone would be able to find them
all without spending a lot of time in
the piece and that's kind of the point
is that if you're in a real space you're
probably not going to notice uh
everything and like the pieces that you
do notice it'll you'll you'll kind of
stumble upon them we hope and you'll um
you'll be you'll be surprised by it and
so that that we spent um I think a lot
of time thinking about that like how to
make this how to make this space when um
uh I guess also like we were we were
just developing individually and so you
can't really like um you can't really
see like I think maybe a couple times
like Melissa J and I were all in the
headset at the same time and so we were
all inhabiting the the de Club at the
same time but for the most part we kind
of had to imagine how the space would be
filled by these like these different
patrons and so um that was like that was
um that was a challenge that towards the
end I think we did figure out but going
forward I think we hope that our avatars
are actually you know real um real
players and they're they're really you
know exchanging um information using
sign language and stuff like that so
that's that's our hope but in the
meantime we do have these stand-ins to
make the place feel more lived in I
think you're in different ways you're
all talking about this this element of
participation um and how by giving the
audience and and actually by giving
people or folks uh an opportunity to
participate and be active members of
each of the experiences they move from
just being voyers to being able to live
the felt experience of the access
potential that the artists are trying to
help create for the world um and I think
that that's just really this is why we
create immersive
art so much um and I think in that space
you know you're already starting to talk
about it a little bit but I think it's
really important to talk about like the
potential and the imagination and the
future uh so the next one is kind of a
conversation to have around what do you
imagine this project will create for the
world and uh what would be important for
the next iterations of these Works to
match the original Concepts or
intentions or at least the essence of
these um different
artworks and we can kind of go and build
on each other in whatever order if
anyone feels called to
start okay perfect um uh I think that uh
this like one of the first things I said
to India is that this project comes in a
moment of needs for this kind of space
in the metaverse uh is a space about uh
it's not just a memorial it's a space
where you actually can find all the
people that have been going through the
same thing as you of course in their
individual way and the fact that you can
share this aspect not only with closer
people but also with International and
like um completely open Community
everywhere in the world it's a
fundamental aspect so I really hope for
this platform to keep living H
especially in the P versions I really
hope that that get implemented because
it's the easiest access for it and I
think one of the aspect that would be
amazing to improve would be the uh input
of of the participants because it's one
is was one of the uh unfortunate
limitations for this prototype that
every person that uh accesses the space
can actually add an image or sound or a
text about his own experience of loss so
I think this is what is going to make
the project like meet exactly the uh the
initial and the concept of the ter dot
space yeah and I'll just add to that I
think like what andira said earlier in
the presentation around like what do our
sites of Memorial look like in our
physical world what like how do we
stumble across the metaverse spilling
back out um I think it's really
interesting because um I think a lot of
of metapher um access is quite limited
and so if we can think about how it
shows up in places that audiences might
um encounter it that they are not
audiences that wouldn't find the
metaverse I think that's really
interesting yeah totally I um I'd
imagine
I would um to in creating spaces like
the vierse death Club I would I would
hope that the cultural artifacts that
are left behind are not just left behind
by me as a developer but also like the
part like people would be able to leave
behind their own their own sort of notes
and their own pieces and then um truly
let it become like an organically lived
in space and I think part of that is
that the the accessibility of the
experience should be um maybe like uh
allowed like different levels of access
like maybe like um for example when I
first uh encountered VR chat I didn't
encounter it in a headset I actually
encountered it on YouTube and then um
and then like the first time I tried it
I didn't try it on a headset I tried it
just like as a normal game and I feel
like um with the metaverse people should
not have to purchase prohibitively
expensive technology in order to access
these spaces because that'll just like
limit the entire experience and it'll um
it'll cent off the space in a way that's
probably like not desirable and so my
hope is that these spaces like um like
the viers St Club could be expanded to
have like a web presence which I think
we're like in the we're talking about
doing that just allowing people to look
at it and walk through it like using
just a browser and um yeah that kind of
goes to what Don was saying too like the
web is a really good uh technology for
that but there's like it kind of has its
own challenges so yeah there's there's
lots of work to
do yeah so with um the project that we
created with Nat and every project that
we create with in in collaboration with
artists in new art City it's awesome
because we can present these pieces in
different modalities like the next time
that this piece is shown it doesn't have
to be in VR or it could be in a a better
version of VR or it could be in a giant
three channel installation or it could
be in something else that we haven't
dreamed up yet so I'm so excited about
just creating these pieces that can live
on into the future and collaborating
with artists and like really finding
finding what artists need and figuring
out how to solve those problems in the
best possible way for whatever the
whatever the situation calls for like in
this casee it calls for a a VR
implementation so we figure it out um
and this is part of an ongoing series of
collaborations in a research project
called virtual access lab that Sammy and
I will talk about on stage in a little
while later this afternoon um so we'll
we'll definitely be getting into like
the future of these these types of
projects
more that's so funny because that's kind
of our our closing conversation is a
little bit about the future so maybe you
can give us a peek into it but too much
because we've had a lot of conversations
today about speculative design and it
would be a shame to not ask all of you
what are your wildest dreams of what
this the webxr or VR uh can hold for
Access and uh also knowing what you know
about actually building or creating them
um and what role do you hope to play in
that
evolution
me okay go for it you yeah like I feel
like
um I've been I feel so lucky that I got
the chance for um making this passage
through uh a project that already exists
and a treat model that is accessible by
other people to experience so I hope
that this technology will keep um kind
of bringing into uh again digital
physical words all this amazing concept
an artist and it will keep supporting
great ideas and great uh Innovations
into the Futures and I really hope that
I get more chances to collaborate with
artists that are amazing like indir and
everyone that got on this te so um I
just hope to keep being that bridge into
creating this 3D
concept yeah for the future really all I
want is for these XR headsets to better
support the web
yeah it's it's free it's open it's
decentralized it's preservable support
it yeah there's I'll add a little bit to
this question which is uh whenever I was
reading some of the applications I
remember Nat specific proposal seemed
like they were trying to kind of push
the edges of access and everything it's
like haptic and you know making
literally looking at all different types
of of disabilities and really trying to
meet those and thinking about the
developer experience of saying okay can
we create you know haptic can we create
gaze base like what are what are some of
those those kinds of ideas as well right
yeah so like better access to the apis
of the device itself and like the webxr
API is like the sort of list of like you
can do this you can't do that it's like
and there's these support tables but
like I I want to see full support tables
for the web and I I mean like it's not
just just like that a device can
technically support a certain feature
but as we're talking about like access
isn't just like opening the door it's
inviting people in too it's making
making the space welcome so for
developers from a developers point of
view that means support for developers
like we need we need to know the steps
to use the the hardware just making it
work is not
enough I'm really interested in spaces
that uh
collaborative and social um that let
people do things together form
communities form really rich bonds often
in physical spaces so like I want to see
headsets that aren't super heavy to wear
and really uncomfortable that dancers
can dance and um I want to see um uh
technologies that allow me to know
exactly where my audience is in physical
space and feed them sound AUD um sound
image
instruction um really like choreograph
like massively multiplayer virtual
worlds in a physical scale but that's
quite far
away yeah I guess I guess for me I'm
going to think very far ahead and say
that um my my great hope for these kinds
of um development processes is actually
that there is not there's a barely
noticeable developer experience and that
you know it's so it's so easy and
frictionless to create these sort of
like worlds and like imagine these
realities that um you almost like don't
don't need someone like me and I'm
saying that as someone who likes to
develop but like I would I would hope
that um communities could could just
like do this like in a in a really
really frictionless way and so I think
what that entails is like probably like
just like significantly better tooling
and
also um maybe even like in in the
meantime while we're reaching that point
maybe like allowing for um more
opportunities to learn about the tooling
and the education and allowing these
communities to like co-create the the
tooling as well so that's that's my hope
I I I wish that um I guess like I just
want I want people to be able to think
it and it just like appears so that's
like your speculative
design I wonder if any of you have any
kind of closing words or thoughts for
our audience about either your
experience of being a part of creating
these prototypes uh or the work that you
are doing now and and how that that has
changed because of what what uh you have
the ways that you've participated in
this
project I would say it's just really
great to work on something that can be a
prototype um often as creative
technologists and designers we get asked
to make the thing work all the time at
100% and do all the things that are just
technically not possible um and it's
really nice to have a space and a
collaboration which can experiment it
itate and find things um that you might
not have expected so I'm just really
grateful to have those kinds of um um
places for this work to
happen that's beautiful did you want to
say uh yeah totally I I agree with that
I think having uh I think the framing of
it as a prototype and sort of like a
speculative World building really gave
us the opportunity to make mistakes on
the way to this point and then to
present something that is still um in a
way like a work in progress and allow
for that work to kind of like continue
onwards and then presenting it as a work
in progress also allows us to
incorporate feedback from people who use
it and then that will sort of like steer
the direction so it's not like I don't I
don't want to think of our piece as like
a final thing we're going to we're we're
going to keep you know ideally keep
working on it and and um you know keep
keep adding ideas onto it so I think the
framing of it was really
important yeah I would I would say also
if you're experiencing the the work and
you have an idea about how it could be
better or something like that definitely
if you can find any of the developers
let them
know yeah did you want to share
something Don or S enough yeah I just
wanted to add very quickly that the
feedback is one of the most important
things in virtual reality so I think
that I want to encourage everyone that
experienced in virtual reality or in the
metaverse to just reaching out everyone
just like EV his opinion is so crucial
to understand different experience
because it's always different from user
to user so I think this is a very nice
to also connect a creator with the
people that are going to um be able to
experience the the projects in the
end yeah and I just wanted to say that
I'm so grateful to have the space and
the support to try these experiments and
so thank you so much to gray area and
Leonardo and the cryptic metaverse lab
it's it's awesome to be able to support
these experiments and try new things
with art and Technology it's it's
amazing yeah and thank you to all of you
if it weren't for each of you and the
the rest of the team these projects
would have never made it to the world
and definitely not in this form so thank
you for all the time and uh many many
hours and ping pong conversations that
it took to get here and I I do think
that we're embodying that one of the
things that um Claudia was talking about
earlier today where uh they said uh uh
Perfection kind of is a is is an
experience of Supremacy culture and so
if we are sharing our process um along
with the project it is giving people
permission uh to kind of Learn out Loud
uh which is important because if we
think we only get to see something at
the end we might not actually have an
opportunity to change it along the way
which I think is part of the thing that
this work is solving for is to say let's
not wait until the end um to try to
implement new things um we don't have to
then reverse engineer but rather every
step of the way we can be um integrating
access so thank you all I know you came
from many corners of the earth including
Italy so uh this has been a really a
treat to get to have you and to get to
pull back the fourth curtain uh so
everyone can learn about how and what it
takes to create work like this so thank
you all so much and uh I think we have
another little break and then we will
continue